---
layout: default
title: Face swapping with The Gimp
---


![Face swap Header](/assets/face-swap/header.jpg)

# Introduction

I've discovered a pretty quick and easy way to do face-swaps such as the above,
using [The GIMP](http://www.gimp.org/). Here's how:

## 1. Obtaining images.

Obtain images of the subjects whose faces you wish to swap. For best results
the faces should be looking in the same direction, and be of reasonable
resolution:

![Ed](/asserts/face-swap/ed.jpg)
![Dave](/asserts/face-swap/dave.jpg)

## 2. Aligning the images.

Load both images into The GIMP and then decide which face you'd like to swap
onto which head. In my case I chose
[Ed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ed_Miliband)'s face on
[Dave](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Cameron)'s body.

Use the measure tool (Shift-M) to measure the angle and distance between each
image's left and right eye, noting down as you go. You'll also need to take
note of whether The GIMP is measuring the angle above the horizontal axis or
below.

![Eye measure](/assets/face-swap/eye-measure.jpg)

Break out a calculator and divide the head image's eye distance by the face
image's eye distance, and scale the face image by this factor:

![Scale image](/assets/face-swap/scale-image.jpg)

Now rotate the face image by the difference between the two eye-angles:

![Rotate image](/assets/face-swap/rotate-image.jpg)

Copy the result, and paste it onto the head image as a new layer. Halve the new
layer's opacity and line up the two faces using the Move tool (M):

![Line image](/assets/face-swap/rotate-image.jpg)

Return the top layer's opacity.

## 3. Adjust the colour balance of the face layer.

Make a copy of both layers, with the face copy on top and the head copy just
below:

![layers](/assets/face-swap/layers.jpg)

Now apply a gaussian blur to both. The blur amount should be as high as
you can get without non-flesh tones from hair or background interfering with
areas you want to transfer to the head image. About 2/3 of the head image
eye-distance has worked well for me. Now set the new face layer to divide, and
the new head layer to multiply. The important bits of face image should now be
shining through but with the lighting and fleshtones to match the head image:

![Colour adjusted face image](/assets/face-swap/colour-adjusted-face-image.jpg)

At this point select *Copy Visible* from the Edit menu, and paste as a new
layer.Move the new layer to second from bottom (right above the bottom head
layer), and make all layers above it invisible.

## 4. Select facial features with a Layer Mask.

Add a layer mask to the newly pasted, colour-corrected face layer. Initialise
it to black (fully transparent). Now with the brush tool (**B**) draw over the
eye, nose and mouth area:

![Pre-blurred mask](/assets/face-swap/pre-blurred-mask.jpg)

